Data from clinical trials with RAF inhibitors demonstrate dramatic regression of melanomas carrying the BRAFV600Eoncogene but not in BRAFWTtumors. Preclinical studies show that BRAFWTcell lines are not only refractory but paradoxically activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and proliferate when treated with ATP-competitive RAF inhibitors. This phenomenon is thought to explain the lack of efficacy in BRAFWTcancers, as well as emergence of spontaneous cutaneous tumors in patients treated with RAF inhibitors. In this study, we uncover an autoregulatory mechanism of RAF kinases that is modulated by catalytic RAF inhibitors and bypassed by BRAF oncogenes. This work has significant implications for the development and therapeutic use of RAF inhibitors for targeting the MAPK pathway.
Gain-of-function mutations that lead to constitutive activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway are among the most common in human cancers. BRAF is mutated in ∼50% of melanomas ( ), and ATP-competitive small molecule inhibitors regress BRAFV600E melanomas, but not wild-type RAF (RAFWT) tumors ( ). Not only are RAFWT cancers refractory, but RAF inhibitors paradoxically increase phosphorylation of downstream effectors MEK and ERK and induce proliferation in cells with upstream RAS mutations, which is thought to occur through an allosteric mechanism involving RAF dimerization ( ; ; ; ). Potentially through a related mechanism, mutations in the phosphate-binding loop (P loop) of BRAF have been characterized, which render BRAF catalytically impaired yet stimulate phosphorylation of downstream targets ( ). However, the underlying biochemistry causing these phenomena has yet to be fully understood.
To explore the mechanism of paradoxical activation in RAFWT cells, a panel of selective tool compounds (Cmpds A-G) with a wide range of potencies against BRAFV600E ( A; A available online) was tested for activity in both A375 (BRAFV600E mutated) and SW620 (BRAFWT) cell lines. As expected, all compounds inhibited phosphorylation of the downstream MAPK pathway target (pERK) and proliferation in A375 cells ( B). However, in SW620 cells, each compound activated ERK in a biphasic pattern with maximal pathway activation occurring at low compound concentrations and modest pathway inhibition at the highest concentrations. This correlated closely with cell proliferation (also shown previously by others; ; ; ). Of note, compound potency for MAPK induction in SW620 correlated well with compound inhibition half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) values in A375; the most potent BRAFV600E inhibitors in A375 (Cmpd A and Cmpd B) activate the MAPK pathway at the lowest concentrations in SW620. The observation that catalytic RAF inhibitors block growth of BRAFV600E cells but stimulate growth in BRAFWT with the same relative potencies led to the hypothesis that RAFWT may negatively regulate the MAPK pathway through a RAF kinase-dependent mechanism.
Having identified a correlation between compound potency for BRAFV600E inhibition and potency of RAFWT activation in cells, we investigated if such a correlation is recapitulated biochemically using isolated RAF proteins. A panel of RAF compounds was screened for their activity against purified BRAFV600E, BRAFWT, and CRAFWT kinase domains. All compounds blocked BRAFV600E phosphorylation of MEK ( C; B). Each compound also inhibited BRAFWT and CRAF enzymes but only at a subphysiological ATP concentration (1 μM; D, 1E, and B). It is surprising that adding compound to BRAFWT and CRAF at physiological ATP concentrations promoted MEK phosphorylation in a biphasic manner, reminiscent of the cellular phenomenon. Although previous studies demonstrate that CRAF undergoes rapid inhibition following activation ( ), the mechanism is unknown. As shown in A, at conditions approaching cellular ATP concentrations of 1-5 mM ( ) the basal activity of both RAFWT isoforms was greatly diminished, in contrast to BRAFV600E, which increased activity at 1 mM ATP. These data suggest that RAF inhibition is ATP dependent. Furthermore, compound potency for BRAFWT and CRAF stimulation correlated with compound half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) for BRAFV600E inhibition, suggesting again that compound activation of RAFWT may be linked directly to inhibition of RAF kinase.
The activating V600E substitution in BRAF appears to alter the apparent Km(ATP) [Km(ATP)app] ( ). Our observation that basal kinase activities of BRAFWT and CRAF were diminished at physiological ATP concentrations suggests additional kinetic differences between BRAFV600E and BRAFWT. Whereas BRAFV600E reached a maximum velocity with a calculated Km(ATP)app of 44 μM, initial rates of catalysis for BRAFWT and CRAF were dramatically reduced at ATP concentrations above 40 μM ( A). The catalytic rates of both WT enzymes did not fit a standard hyperbolic model; thus, we were unable to determine a Km(ATP)app for BRAFWT and CRAF. Although other kinases such as KSR have been shown to modulate RAF activity and affect paradoxical activation ( ; ), KSR was not observed with the purified RAF preparations. All wild-type RAF constructs tested were inactivated at high concentrations of ATP, including BRAF kinase domain isolated to a single band (&gt;95% purity; A), suggesting a RAF-autonomous mechanism.
Although the initial enzymatic rate only appeared diminished at concentrations approaching 100 μM ATP, evidence of the catalytic rate change was observed for both BRAFWT and CRAF even at 0.5 μM ATP ( B), suggesting that RAF autophosphorylation occurs, albeit slowly, at concentrations below the observed initial rate change around 40 μM ATP. The rate change occurred faster as ATP increased and was nearly instantaneous at the highest concentrations of ATP, causing the observed initial enzymatic rate to appear diminished. These data strongly suggest that BRAFWT and CRAF are negatively regulated by autophosphorylation.
To determine if RAF catalytic activity is required, BRAFWT and CRAF were incubated at 1 mM ATP to promote inhibition. Excess ATP was then removed before kinase activity was measured by adding MEK substrate and a lower ATP concentration allowing for maximal RAFWT activity. Preincubation with 1 mM ATP resulted in &gt;80% inhibition of either BRAFWT or CRAF, indicating that inhibition is a stable modification and is not reversed after removing ATP ( C). Therefore, inhibition of RAFWT is not transient but is consistent with a covalent modification such as phosphorylation. An electrophoretic mobility shift of CRAF was also observed only after ATP treatment and without compound ( D), again consistent with a phosphorylation event. Finally, to determine whether RAF kinase activity is required for ATP inhibition, a selective inhibitor (Cmpd E) was added to the preincubation step and then removed along with excess ATP (due to the uniquely low compound dissociation half-life of &lt;10 min). Preincubation with compound blocked RAF inhibition ( C) and prevented CRAF mobility shift ( D). Therefore, ATP and RAF catalytic activity are required for inhibition and putative phosphorylation of WT enzymes. Together, these data strongly support an inhibitory autokinase mechanism regulating RAFWT activity.
Since compound-mediated activation and autoinhibition of RAF are readily observed at cellular concentrations of ATP, we hypothesized that RAF compounds activate RAFWT by relieving RAF autoinhibition. If correct, RAF inhibitors should reduce rates of MEK phosphorylation at subphysiological ATP concentrations but rescue activity at higher ATP concentrations. Indeed, small amounts of a potent RAF inhibitor decreased the catalytic rate of CRAF at low ATP concentrations ( E). However, at 200 μM and 1 mM ATP, the RAF inhibitor partly rescued CRAF autoinhibition. These data demonstrate that RAF compounds block MEK phosphorylation under conditions in which CRAF autoinhibition is not readily observed and suggests that the apparent activation of CRAF by compound treatment takes place through partial rescue of CRAF autoinhibition.
If compound activation of RAFWT can be explained through preventing autophosphorylation, RAF compounds should neither reverse autoinhibition nor activate the autoinhibited form of enzyme. Rather, compound should only reduce the remaining catalytic activity of the autoinhibited form of RAF. To test this, rates of MEK phosphorylation were measured under several ATP and inhibitor concentrations and compound using both autoinhibited and control CRAF enzymes. Consistent with our hypothesis, autoinhibited CRAF exhibited reduced catalytic activity with standard Michaelis Menten kinetics. Autoinhibited CRAF was not further inhibited by high ATP concentrations but reached an apparent Vmax, thereby making calculations for kinetic rate constants possible ( E). Furthermore, although pretreatment with ATP did not affect compound potency ( B), the compound did not stimulate CRAF kinase activity at any tested concentration of compound or ATP but only decreased the enzymatic rate in a manner consistent with ATP-competitive inhibitor kinetics ( E), demonstrating that a catalytic RAF inhibitor cannot activate the autoinhibited form of CRAF.
Preliminary mass spectrometry experiments of BRAF and CRAF proteins incubated in 1 mM ATP revealed two phosphorylated peptides that reside in the DFG activation loop and the P loop ( A-S3F). To confirm specific inhibitory phosphorylation site(s), alanine substitutions were made for each serine in each domain, as well as phosphomimetic (aspartic acid or glutamic acid) substitutions and relative kinase activities were measured. Phosphomimetic substitutions in the activation loop of BRAF and CRAF showed no inhibition but were slightly activating with the exception of CRAFS499D ( A). However, BRAF P-loop mutations S465D and S467E had reduced kinase activity, suggesting that phosphorylation of these serines may be inhibitory. Curiously, BRAFS465D and BRAFS467E caused only partial inhibition, raising the question of whether phosphorylation at both sites may be required for complete inactivation. This hypothesis is further supported by the tandem mass spectrometry spectra, which showed phosphorylation of both serines in the P loop ( A-S3B, S3E, and S3F). Alternatively, CRAFS359D blocked nearly all activity, yet CRAFS357D had almost no effect when compared to the alanine mutation at the same site ( A), indicating that S359 may be the primary site of inhibitory phosphorylation. Each alanine-substituted enzyme was assayed under low and high ATP concentrations as well (1 μM ATP and 1 mM ATP, respectively). Although both WT enzymes and each of the activation-loop mutants were inhibited at 1 mM ATP, BRAFS465A, BRAFS467A, and CRAFS359A showed higher catalytic activity at 1 mM ATP ( B). Further profiling showed that both BRAF P-loop mutations largely rescued ATP-dependent autoinhibition, and the CRAFS359A mutation completely reversed the effect while CRAFS357A had no effect ( G), demonstrating that serine residues in the P loop of both enzymes are required for RAF autoinhibition.
To test if P-loop phosphorylation is required for compound activation, alanine mutants and WT controls were tested at 1 mM ATP. As predicted, BRAFS465A and BRAFS467A had higher catalytic activity than BRAFWT and were inhibited and not activated by RAF inhibitor ( C), demonstrating that both S465 and S467 are required for compound activation of BRAF. Similar results were observed for CRAFS359A. To confirm P-loop phosphorylation, a polyclonal antibody was raised against the CRAF phospho-S359 peptide and affinity purified. Purified CRAF kinase domain was treated with ATP and immunoblotted using the phospho-specific antibody. CRAF S359 phosphorylation increased after treatment with ATP ( D) and diminished after λ phosphatase treatment. Phosphorylation was also prevented by cotreatment with a RAF inhibitor, again confirming that CRAF S359 is indeed an autophosphorylation site.
To confirm P-loop phosphorylation of endogenous CRAF, SW620 cells (KRASG12V) were treated with a RAF inhibitor and CRAF was immunoprecipitated from cell lysates. Compound treatment inhibited CRAF S359 phosphorylation ( A), consistent with the hypothesis that CRAF S359 is an endogenous autophosphorylation site. To test the functional role of P-loop phosphorylation in cells, HEK293 cells expressing cMyc-epitope-tagged CRAF or CRAFS359A point mutant were treated with RAF inhibitor. Overexpression of CRAFWT increased the ability of compound to stimulate pERK above levels in endogenous, control cells expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) ( B). However, compound activation was not observed in CRAFS359A-expressing cells, demonstrating that CRAF S359 phosphorylation is required. Furthermore, basal pERK was elevated in CRAFS359A-expressing cells compared to overexpressed CRAFWT, consistent with the hypothesis that S359 is an inhibitory phosphorylation site.
Although CRAF overexpression is sufficient to mediate compound activation in HEK293 cells, similar experiments with BRAF did not promote compound activation of pERK ( ). However, BRAF mutations have previously been identified in patient tumor samples that cover nearly every residue of the P loop, including serine 467 ( ), and mutations of the neighboring glycines (464, 466, and 469) are among the most frequently occurring non-V600E BRAF mutations ( ). This suggested to us not only that the P loop is an important regulatory domain but also that mutations in this region may activate BRAF by relieving or preventing P-loop autophosphorylation. To test if glycine mutations disrupt P-loop autophosphorylation, we cloned and purified BRAF kinase domains with a G464V or G464E mutation. Both enzymes were highly active and displayed no signs of ATP-dependent autoinhibition ( A). Km(ATP)app values were calculated and were equivalent to the Km(ATP)app for BRAFV600E. Furthermore, treatment with compound did not activate either BRAFG464V or BRAFG464E in the presence of low (1 μM) or high (1 mM) ATP concentration, suggesting again that autoinhibition through P-loop phosphorylation is required for compound activation in vitro ( B).
Having shown that BRAFG464V and BRAFG464E disrupt P-loop autoinhibition and compound activation in vitro, we wanted to test if this is also true in a cellular system. Because compound activation also appears to be exaggerated in context of activated RAS ( ; ; ), two cell lines were identified with co-occurring BRAF G464 and KRAS mutations. As predicted, treatment with RAF inhibitor reduced pERK levels, and no activation was observed in HEY-A8 (KRASG12D/BRAFG464E) and MDA-MB-231 (KRASG13D/BRAFG464V) cells ( C), suggesting that P-loop phosphorylation of BRAF is critical for compound activation in cells.
Previous studies have shown that RAF inhibitors promote BRAF/CRAF coimmunoprecipitation and promote association with RAS ( ; ), and it is therefore thought that induced dimerization and/or association with RAS may contribute to the paradoxical activation. However, although treatment with Cmpd A promoted coimmunoprecipitation of the BRAF/CRAF complex, no paradoxical activation was observed in HEY-A8 or MDA-MB-231 cells ( C), suggesting that any compound-induced dimerization was insufficient to activate endogenous RAF. Similar experiments were performed with SW620 cells treated with RAF inhibitor, which increased pMEK/pERK levels and promoted BRAF/CRAF and RAF/RAS coimmunoprecipitation as expected ( A). However, these phenomena were frequently not correlated. A shows that .01-.1 μM of inhibitor was sufficient to strongly elevate pMEK and pERK, yet little or no BRAF/CRAF coimmunoprecipitation was observed until relatively high inhibitor concentrations were used (between 0.3 and 3 μM). Similar observations were made for RAS/RAF coimmunoprecipitation, suggesting that most cellular RAF is cytoplasmic and monomeric at inhibitor concentrations that cause very strong pathway activation. This observation suggests either that very low amounts of induced dimerization and RAS association is sufficient for pathway activation or that another mechanism contributes to paradoxical activation in cells.
To test the relationship between dimerization and catalytic activity, point mutations of the putative RAF dimer interface ( ; ), which disrupt dimerization, were introduced into the kinase domains of BRAF and CRAF (CRAFR401A and BRAFR509A). Consistent with results published by others ( ; ), arginine-to-alanine substitution ablated the kinase activity of the purified enzyme ( B), suggesting that monomeric BRAF and CRAF are inactive. However, BRAFV600E/R509A had similar activity to BRAFV600E, demonstrating that monomeric BRAFV600E is active. Since BRAFV600E also does not respond to inhibitory P-loop autophosphorylation, we hypothesized that disrupting P-loop phosphorylation, even of RAF monomers, may be sufficient to strongly activate the pathway. Although CRAFR401A was inactive at all concentrations of ATP tested, mutating the P-loop autophosphorylation site rendered CRAF unresponsive to ATP-dependent autoinhibition and strongly rescued kinase activity of the R401A mutant ( C), suggesting that preventing autoinhibition through blocking P-loop autophosphorylation is sufficient to strongly activate CRAF monomers.
These findings demonstrate that P-loop autophosphorylation is a critical mechanism regulating RAF kinase activity. Although P-loop autophosphorylation has not been described previously, P-loop phosphorylation is known to inhibit several other kinases. Tyr 15 phosphorylation of CDK1 ( ; ) and CDK2 ( ) inhibits kinase activity through steric blockade of ATP and/or peptide substrate binding. A similar phenomenon has been observed for BCR-ABL P-loop phosphorylation, though the structural mechanism of inhibition is unknown but likely differs from CDK regulation ( ). In the case of BRAF and CRAF, P-loop phosphorylation did not alter the Km(ATP)app ( E and G), suggesting that ATP binding is unaffected though blocked peptide substrate binding, as in the case of CDK2, is a possibility.
P-loop phosphorylation may also have consequences for activation-loop conformation. The BRAF crystal structure shows an interaction between the P loop and the DFG activation loop through F468 and V600 ( ). Phosphorylation of T599 and S602 (or the V600E mutation) is thought to destabilize this interaction, allowing a shift to the "DFG-in" conformation, which is required for kinase activity ( ; ). Phosphorylation of the P loop at BRAF S465/S467 (CRAF S359) may then affect the activation-loop/P-loop interaction, thereby stabilizing the inactive, DFG-out confirmation. Similarly, since BRAFV600E, BRAFG464E, and BRAFG464V were neither activated by RAF inhibitor nor sensitive to autoinhibition, this suggests that the mechanism of oncogene activation may be not only to mimic T599/S601 phosphorylation but also to render the enzyme unresponsive to P-loop autophosphorylation.
We propose that RAFWT exists in an autoinhibited state at physiological conditions through autophosphorylation of the P loop and a competing reaction such as a phosphatase must be required to frequently renew the pool of active RAF within the cell. Therefore, catalytic inhibition of RAF would shift the equilibrium to stabilize the active form by relieving RAF autoinhibition. The inhibitor potency shift observed in RAFWT cells could therefore be explained by the very high concentrations of RAF compound required to occupy both RAF molecules and inhibit MAPK signaling in RAFWT cells.
This model offers a complete explanation for the activation of RAF kinase by catalytic inhibitors. However, some aspects are consistent with previous models. Heidorn et al. initially reported that expression of catalytically inactive BRAF phenocopies RAF compound treatment and can promote tumor progression in KRAS-mutated cells. They state that only BRAF-isoform-selective inhibitors activate the pathway and invoke a mechanism involving BRAF-mediated regulation of CRAF ( ). Although MAPK activity in KRAS-mutated cells appears to be mediated by CRAF ( ; ), we show that pan RAF inhibitors with high potency for CRAF inhibition strongly promote MEK phosphorylation in vitro and in cells ( and B). Poulikakos et al. showed that RAF dimer formation is required for compound activation and hypothesized that binding of compound to one RAF molecule within a RAF dimer transactivates the adjacent RAF protomer through a kinase-independent mechanism. If transactivation in cells is entirely allosteric, it must then persist after inhibitor dissociation, as no inhibitor is present during cell washes, lysis, immunoprecipitation, and subsequent kinase assay. An alternative explanation, which our data support, is that activation involves a covalent modification. While these mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, inhibitor treatment did not activate autoinhibited RAF kinase in vitro ( E), compound-induced dimerization alone was not sufficient to activate the pathway in cells ( C), and disrupting P-loop phosphorylation was sufficient to activate RAF monomers ( C). Whereas RAS activity and dimerization likely play a role, these results suggest that inhibitory P-loop autophosphorylation is dominant to conformational effects of RAF dimers binding compound.
Inhibition of P-loop phosphorylation may also have adverse clinical consequences. Three different clinical RAF inhibitors, Vemurafenib, XL281, and Sorafenib, promoted dermal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and keratoacanthomas ( ; ; ), which are likely caused by RAF compound activation of the MAPK pathway in BRAFWT skin ( ; ; ; ). Although SCC is not currently a dose-limiting toxicity for melanoma patients, efficacy is primarily limited due to acquired resistance to RAF drugs. The median progression free survival for melanoma patients taking Vemurafenib is limited to 8 months ( ). In-vitro-acquired resistance modeling shows that BRAFV600E mutant melanoma cells become dependent on drug for sustained pERK and cell growth ( ) through activation of upstream signaling or increased RAFWT expression ( ; ). Furthermore, a recent report indicates that RAF inhibitors may promote secondary melanomas ( ). RAF inhibitors themselves may, in fact, be promoting tumor growth by relieving RAF autoinhibition.
RAF enzyme and MEK substrate proteins were isolated from baculoviral expression in Sf9 cells via (His)6 tag and Ni-affinity chromatography. Activity for BRAF and CRAF semipurified protein was determined by AlphaScreen (PerkinElmer) as described elsewhere ( ). Enzyme concentrations used were as follows: BRAF (kinase domain), 50 pM; BRAFV600E (kinase domain), 100 pM; CRAF (kinase domain), 4 pM; MEK1 (kinase dead), 20 nM, unless otherwise stated. Compounds were diluted in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (2.5% final concentration). Zebda Spin Desalting Columns (Pierce) were used to remove excess ATP and compound.
All compounds were provided by Novartis Global Discovery Chemistry or the Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation and were dissolved in DMSO (0.2% final concentration). Cell proliferation was measured using Cell Titer-Glo (Promega). pERK levels were measured by sandwich immunoassay (Meso Scale Discovery). The following primary antibodies were used for immunoblots: ARAF, BRAF, and KRAS (all from Santa Cruz Biotechnology); CRAF (BD Transduction Laboratories); pCRAF S359 (Covance); MEK1/2, pMEK1/2Ser217/221, ERK1/2, pERK1/2Thr202/Tyr204, and Myc Tag (all from Cell Signaling Technology); (His)6 (QIAGEN); and for immunoprecipitations, BRAF (BD Transduction Laboratories), CRAF (Abcam), and RAS (Millipore).
pBlueBac4.5 (Invitrogen) vectors were used for baculoviral expression. BRAFWT and BRAFV600E catalytic domains (residues 437-765) each contain a C-terminal (His)6 tag, and CRAF catalytic domain (residues 325-648) contains an N-terminal (His)6 tag and two activating point mutations (Y340E and Y341E, which mimic SRC phosphorylation and are required for active enzyme; ). pcDNA3.1/myc-His (Invitrogen) was used for expression of full-length BRAFWT, CRAFWT, and CRAFS359A constructs in mammalian cells. Point mutations were introduced using a site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene).
We thank the chemists at Genomics Novartis Foundation for providing Cmpds A, B, and C and Dan Poon and the chemists at Novartis Global Discovery Chemistry for providing Cmpds D, E, and F. We thank Pablo Garcia, Chuck Voliva, Susan Kaufman, Brent Appleton, Nanxin Li, Kevin Shoemaker, Emma Lees, and Bill Sellers for scientific discussions. Special thanks to Sean Steen, Gwynn Pardee, Isabel Zaror, and Novartis Protein Sciences for technical support.
All of the work described was done at and supported by Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research. M.H., H.M., J.C., M.W., L.T., H.Z., S.H., M.H.-N., D.S., and T.N. are or were employees of Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research. J.T. is an employee of the Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation.
Supplemental Information includes four figures and Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found in this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2013.03.033.
