The existence of Sos-1 in two physically and functionally distinct pools suggests the hypothesis that its presence in a S/G or a S/E/E8 complex could dictate its Ras- or Rac-specific GEF activities, respectively. To explore this possibility, we used an in vitro assay that can score GEF activities in Sos-1–containing immunoprecipitates. Cells were transfected with either Sos-1 alone (SosTfx) or a combination of S/E/E8 (Triple Tfx) ( Fig. 7 A). When Sos-1 was immunoprecipitated from SosTfx, it displayed Ras-GEF, but not Rac-GEF, activity ( Fig. 7 B). Of note, little E3b1 and no Eps8 could be detected in Sos-1 immunoprecipitates ( Fig. 7 A). Conversely, Grb2 was readily recovered from the same immunoprecipitates (unpublished data). We then used the Triple Tfx and coimmunoprecipitated Sos-1 with anti-Eps8 antibodies ( Fig. 7, A and B ). Under these conditions, all of the coimmunoprecipitated Sos-1 is present in the S/E/E8 tricomplex ( Scita et al., 1999 ). Despite lower levels of Sos-1 in the coimmunoprecipitate (with respect to a Sos-1 immunoprecipitate from SosTfx), Rac-GEF activity was now present ( Fig. 7 B). Conversely, no Ras-GEF activity could be detected ( Fig. 7 B). The lack of Ras-GEF activity was not due to the low levels of Sos-1. To prove this point, we immunoprecipitated from SosTfx an amount of Sos-1 comparable to that present in anti-Eps8 immunoprecipitates from Triple Tfx ( Fig. 7, A and B , lanes SosTfx1/10). Under these conditions, Ras-GEF activity was readily detectable ( Fig. 7 B). The detection of Rac-specific GEF activity in anti-Eps8 immunoprecipitates strictly required the presence of Sos-1, since no GEF activity was detected in Eps8 immunoprecipitates, in the absence of coexpressed Sos-1 ( Scita et al., 1999 ; unpublished data). Furthermore, no Rac-GEF activity could be detected in Eps8 immunoprecipitates from lysates of cells transfected with Sos-1, E3b1, and an Eps8 mutant that is impaired in its ability to bind E3b1 and thereby cannot form a trimeric complex ( Scita et al., 1999 ). Figure 7.
